Dear Prof. Tan!

I am really excited to interview you on your new book, *World
Christianity: Perspectives and Insights*, at 9:30am Eastern Standard
Time (i.e., 6:30am Pacific Standard Time) on the morning of Wednesday,
September 21, 2016. I’m delighted that we’ve been able to synchronize
our schedules in order to do this!

 

Our interview will be published in our online venue: *Unitas Fidei: An
Online Journal For World Christianity*
(<http://aqueductproject.org/category/book-reviews/>). From 2011–2015, I
conducted telephone interviews with 150 scholars and Christian leaders
from 21 countries on the subject of the unity of the church. Through
this process, I discovered (at least—for me it was a discovery!) that
Christians from various theological traditions conceive of Christian
unity very differently. It’s not just our doctrinal differences that
separate us; in fact we conceive of Christian unity in a variety of
ways, and our attempts to pursue Christian unity can therefore be
misunderstood by Christians of other traditions. *Unitas Fidei* is meant
to be a place where we can set to work understanding and pursuing the
unity for which Jesus prayed in John 17.

During our conversation, I would like to ask the following questions,
perhaps somewhat amended so as to best fit the flow of our discussion:

(1) *World Christianity: Perspectives and Insights* (Orbis, 2016) is an
    anthology of essays in honor of Peter C. Phan. When did you first
    learn of Prof. Phan’s research? When did you come into personal
    contact with Prof. Phan?

(2) Part II of this book is titled “World Christianity and New Ways of
    Doing Theology” and features contributions on an array of dogmatic
    foci, including the sacraments, the Trinity, Christology,
    hermeneutics, and missions. What is it about the phenomenon of world
    Christianity, precisely, that opens new insights into these
    traditional theological themes? What is one area of theological
    research that you would like to see given greater attention in the
    near future from a world Christianity perspective?

(3) Chapter 17 is an essay by Edmund Kee-Fook Chia and is titled
    “Interchurch Dialogue: Global Perspectives.” In your view, what new
    opportunities and challenges does the phenomenon of world
    Christianity bring to the ecumenical task?

(4) I know that historians are not futurists, but given the history of
    world Christianity, what are some of the forces at play today that
    you believe will significantly shape the story of Christianity
    through the remainder of the twenty-first century?

(5) How do you understand theologically the diversity of streams of
    Christian faith expressed in world Christianity? What does it mean
    for you as a Roman Catholic (a Christian tradition that has
    emphasized institutional unity) to articulate an “Asian
    Christianity” or an “African Christianity”?

(6) What would it mean for the church to be united? How would we
    recognize this unity, and what can Christians do today to pursue
    this unity?

We will record our interview via Skype (please see the attached
“Technical Recommendations” for details). Sometime before our interview,
**I would be grateful if you would send me a contact request via Skype**
so that I have your details and can call you via Skype on the morning of
the interview. I would also be grateful if you would kindly send me a
telephone number at which you will be able to be reached on the morning
of the interview (in the very unlikely case of internet failure on
either of our ends); my cell phone number is (509) 995-5720.

Many thanks!

Yours,

Jonathan

Jonathan J. Armstrong, Ph.D.

Associate Professor of Bible and Theology

Moody Bible Institute – Spokane

611 East Indiana Avenue

Spokane, WA 99207

USA
