Palmer Bandy

Josh Malone, PhD

The Cappadocian Fathers

25 February 2016

Basil of Caesarea, *On the Holy Spirit*, 1-16

Basil wrote one of his first treatises on the Trinity, *Against
Eunomius*, sometime in the early 360’s, only later to write a specific
treatise concerning the deity of the Holy Spirit around 373-375AD. He
writes *On the Holy Spirit* in response to the request of Amphilochius,
the bishop of Iconium,[^1] that he provide “clear teaching” on the
proper way to speak about the Holy Spirit.

Basil begins by justifying the necessity and properness for those who
are truly seeking knowledge of God to inquire into the smallest details
of speech about God, for “likeness to God…cannot be had without
knowledge, and knowledge comes from teaching. Speech, though, is the
beginning of teaching, and the parts of speech are syllables and words.
So, the investigation of syllables does not fall outside the goal \[of
our calling\].”[^2] In these words, Basil captures with impressive
brevity the necessity of linguistic precision in theological reflection.
Knowledge is a necessary (though not, it seems, sufficient)[^3]
condition for increasing in “likeness to God,” and knowledge is mediated
through language, which is made up of many component parts. This
conviction is largely what motivates Basil’s investigation into
Scripture’s use of prepositions with reference to the Holy Spirit. Do we
agree with this conviction of Basil, and if so, how should this
influence our speech about God, whether in discussions, teaching, or
prayer?

In his public prayers as bishop, Basil would sometimes pray “to the
Father, with the Son together with the Holy Spirit,” and other times he
would pray “to the Father, through the Son, in the Holy Spirit.” Among
those who heard him pray in this way, some thought that Basil’s variant
usages of prepositions gave them grounds for positing that the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit are different “in nature.”[^4] Underlying their
reasoning is a premise similar to one that Basil refuted approximately
ten years earlier in *Against Eunomius*: in that work, he primarily
refuted Eunomius’ claim that names signify essence; in this work, he is
refuting the broader claim that “things that are expressed differently
are different in nature.” A representative example of this type of
reasoning applied to Scripture is Aetius’ interpretation of 1
Corinthians 8:6, leading him and those who agree to conclude “from whom”
designates the creator, “through whom” his instrument, and “in whom” the
time or the place.

Basil claims that his opponents’ philosophy of language, specifically
regarding the distinctions indicated by prepositions, is sourced from
pagans. In response to this, Basil concedes “that the Word of Truth has
often made use of these terms”—that is, the lexical forms and attendant
conventional meanings of such terms—“but we say that the freedom of the
Spirit is in no way enslaved to the trivialities of the Pagans.”[^5] In
other words, Scripture determines the meaning of its own terms. He
offers up numerous citations from Scripture in which the prepositional
phrases “from whom,” “through whom,” and “in whom” are each used of the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Moreover, sometimes “through whom” is used
to have the same meaning as “from whom.”

Basil moves on to giving arguments for the equality of the Father and
Son in glory, honor, and dignity. It is absurd to think that the Son can
temporally come *after* (Gk. *meta* in the accusative) the Father, since
he is the Creator of all things, existing before time existed. He
returns to an argument he made from John 1:1 in book two of *Against
Eunomius*: first, thoughts cannot get beyond “was”; and second, the
imagination cannot go further than “the beginning.” What is interesting
in this section is the apparent development in Basil’s thought
concerning the dignity of the Son. In *Against Eunomius*, he wrote that
the Son was second/lesser than the Father in both rank and dignity, but
here he describes the Son as he “who has been united to the Father in
nature, in glory, and in dignity.”[^6] In addition, he refutes those who
were accusing him of inventing new ways to speak about God by saying
that “with whom” is fittingly predicated of the Son.

Basil eventually narrows his focus to the Holy Spirit, briefly examining
the various names that Scripture ascribes to him and then responding to
objections that the Holy Spirit is of a different nature and therefore
lesser than the Father and the Son. Basil’s belief that “salvation is
established through the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit”
convinces him that the Spirit must be one with the Father and the Son.
One’s initiation into the church through confession of and baptism in
the threefold name leads him to write: “I testify to anyone who refuses
the Spirit that his faith in the Father and the Son, which he cannot
have without the simultaneous presence of the Spirit, will become
fruitless for him.”[^7] Baptism is clearly central to Basil’s argument
that the Spirit must be equal to the Father and the Son. Why do you
think this is? With our understanding of baptism, are we able to adopt
the same sort of arguments?

In chapter sixteen, Basil seeks to establish the unity of the Spirit
with the Father and the Son. He cites the story of Annanias and Sapphira
in Acts 5 as a clear testimony of the Spirit’s divinity, for “sins
against God and against the Holy Spirit are the same thing.”[^8] The
Spirit is present at creation, as Psalm 32:6 indicates, and he was
intimately associated with the incarnate Word in history, being “joined
to the very flesh of the Lord as his anointing” (Jn. 1:33; Lk. 3:22). In
addition, Basil writes, the Holy Spirit will be present at the final
judgment. But this last point is less clearly drawn from a particular
Scriptural passage: what, then, is the theological reasoning underlying
this claim?

[^1]: Iconium is located in modern day Turkey (the roughly western half
    of which was known in ancient times as Asia Minor) and was one of
    the cities in which Paul and Barnabas preached the gospel, as
    recorded in Acts 14:1-7.

[^2]: *On the Holy Spirit*, 1.2.

[^3]: From what is quoted, Basil seems not to consider “likeness to God”
    a purely intellectual matter. Although “likeness to God…cannot be
    had *without* knowledge,” this is not the same as saying that
    knowledge alone is able to effect likeness to God.

[^4]: *On the Holy Spirit,* 2.4.

[^5]: Ibid., 3.

[^6]: Ibid., 6.15 (pg. 42)

[^7]: Ibid., 11.27.

[^8]: Ibid., 16.37.
